we've already talked about packages in a
previous video but in this video we're
gonna see how we can actually create
those inside of IntelliJ and explore
interactively how packages behave and
also on the side talk about jar files
briefly so as we saw before there exists
something in Java known as a package
which is distinct from a project that
thing we did in the previous little clip
so a package is a Java syntax idea and
it addresses the fact that multiple
classes might have the same name there
might be a dog class used by me there
might be a dog class used by I don't
know Franklin L bean who runs some
company somewhere right and so to deal
with the fact that me and Franklin Bean
might come up with the same name for a
class we use this idea of a namespace
that any package or in each class I
write should be associated with some
kind of package some kind of a name an
extra part of the name so to do that
what we do is rather than renaming the
class something like Josh hug dog or
something I will instead at the top of
my file I'll say package oh gosh Josh H
dot animal and what that says is that
this package is named dog about Josh H -
animal and the dog class belongs to it
and so this convention as I mentioned in
an earlier video refers to the website
address so the org unit package so or
j-unit or first - a package called org
dot J unit and it also refers to the
website J unit org in this case they
have a single package that goes with
this website so they didn't call it like
or J unit dot testing stuff or is it my
case maybe I have multiple packages at
my website josh hdg so the package in
this case full name is Josh H - animal
capturing both the website and the
special thing that I'm building okay so
that's nothing new but what's gonna
happen in a moment is we'll see how this
works in IntelliJ now as a reminder
whenever we actually ID create a package
then whenever we want to use a class in
that package we have to either use the
entire canonical name or we can use the
import statement where we can just use
the simple name which will be just dog
and we'll do that in a moment okay so
there's two steps to creating a package
the first step is to put the package
name at the top with a package
declaration just like this and then the
second thing to do is to make sure that
the file is stored in a folder with the
appropriate folder name now there's a
rule in Java that the Java interpreter
uses and the Java compiler uses to find
the files at once so if there's a file
but as package name Oh Gachet animal it
needs to be in a folder where we just
replace each of these dots with a slash
so it needs to be in a folder
ugh slash Josh eh slash animal in other
words there's a folder named animal
inside of a folder named Josh eh inside
of a folder named uh and we could do
that manually from our computer but I'll
show you first how we can do it in
intelligent so to do this I'm gonna say
file new package so let's go into
IntelliJ and I go up here and I'll say
file new where's there this package and
we'll call this package
Oh Josh H dot animal so that has created
here this little funny folder thing here
and if actually if I go to show and
Explorer I can see that there's now a
folder called ugh inside of that is Josh
H inside of that is animal and nothing
is currently in the package and so if I
want to actually create a class inside
this package I'll right click on the
package name and say new Java class and
we'll might be called this dog so this
automatically puts a declaration at the
top and we'll see that the dog Java file
is inside of this package and what that
means in terms of our computer if we
actually go here we'll see that in this
folder ok again we'll go up inside a bug
slash Josh H / animal we now have dog we
can open it up in sublime and see that
nothing special is happening here so at
that point we have now added a file
known as dog to our Shh animal package
and here's all the slide versions of
just the same thing okay so what we've
just done then right is we've just done
those two steps I mentioned earlier I
said there's two steps to creating a
package okay
the first is putting the package name at
the top and the second is making sure
it's in the right folder so by doing
those steps in IntelliJ we have done
exactly these things and again we could
have done them manually
I could have manually gone in here and
said new folder ugh and so forth and
just repeat it over and over but I saved
myself some time by using IntelliJ
instead
do we use packages well as we saw in a
previous lecture and as I said a little
bit ago if we have a class in one
package on anyone and we want to use it
in another package we can use the
canonical name and the canonical name
refers to the entire name of the class
including its package name and so in dog
launcher which is not part of the
package notice I could say Oh Josh H or
sorry if I say dog B equals new dog it
won't work but if I say oh gosh H animal
dog then what the IntelliJ compiler will
do is it'll say okay in this folder
right let's think about it from the Java
compiler perspective it says in this
folder is there an UGG / Josh H / animal
/ dog yes yes there is so everything's
set up here nice and beautifully and so
now we can use the ugh Josh H - animal
dog class from dog launcher we can also
use an import statement and in that case
we can just use the simple name instead
so if I ants go back to our dog launcher
and I say import Oh Josh H animal dot
dog now I no longer need to say this
entire canonical name and I can just say
dog okay and Java automatically knows
that the dog I'm referring to is this
dog because I imported it now as I
mentioned begin in a previous lecture
unlike a language like Python where an
import is necessary to use code that's
outside of the current context that is
to use something that's from another
package you don't have to do it in Java
in Java the import statement is just a
syntactic ol convenience as opposed to
unlocking new capabilities now an
important note is that a class where you
don't actually put a package name which
is almost all the code you've written in
this class it is called or it's said to
be part of the so called default package
there is a nice post on Stack Overflow
where someone just simply puts it this
way you should avoid using the default
package except for very small example
programs and I agree things like our
homework 1 or sorry our project 1 a
project 1b those really should have been
part of a package but I didn't want to
layer even more syntax on you but from
this point on as we're working on our
programs we're gonna have everything
be part of a package so in other words
whenever you write programs from now on
you should always have some kind of
package declaration up top I guess if
you writing tiny little example code you
can avoid it for some but there's no
reason not to have part of a package it
makes it's easy to do in Java so the
idea here is again just to ensure that
we don't have two classes with the same
name that we always know exactly what
we're getting in other words we're being
explicit rather than implicit now
there's one little note here which is
that you cannot import code from the
default package so in other words if I'm
in the dog class there's no way I could
call a dog launcher that main if I try
and do this it doesn't know what dog
launcher is I can't do something like
default dog launcher that does not work
so in other words there's literally no
way that the dog class could ever get
ahold of anything in the dog launcher
class because it's part of the default
package and that's just one thing to
keep in mind that's an additional reason
why you should avoid using the default
package except for very small example
programs so the last little thing I want
to say about packages is that if you
realize that you have created a class
that's not part of a package then you
simply need to do two things one is add
the name of the package using a package
declaration at the top of the file so
let me do that let's say I want to make
Dog launcher part of this class maybe
I've just decided it seems like a dog
launcher should be part of this animal
package then I'll say a package Oh Josh
H dot animal now at this point this is
fine but it says I don't understand the
package name does not correspond to the
file path in other words on my computer
dog launchers here but supposed to be an
ugh slash Josh H last animal so I
couldn't move it manually all right I
couldn't do this and like keep repeating
that and move it into the appropriate
folder but I can actually also do it in
IntelliJ by simply dragging it into this
package I click a refactor and now
everything's fine
everybody compiles happily and if we now
look at the bug this folder it's gone
the dog launcher is gone but if we go
into ugh slash Josh H slash animal we
see dog launcher is happily waiting
there for us so IntelliJ again makes it
easier for us so in this next little
clip I'm going to talk about jar files
but I'll pause here for you to
reflect or maybe mess around on your own